DOCS-3613: Iterate on Connect Devices (#4037)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/get-started/setup-micro.md

---
linkTitle: "Set up an ESP32"
title: "Set up an ESP32"
weight: 25
layout: "docs"
type: "docs"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/install.png"]
imageAlt: "Install Viam"
no_list: false
description: "Install the lightweight version of the software that drives hardware and connects your device to the cloud."
aliases:
  - /installation/microcontrollers/
  - /installation/prepare/microcontrollers/
  - /installation/prepare/microcontrollers/
  - /build/micro-rdk/
  - /get-started/installation/microcontrollers/
  - /installation/viam-micro-server-setup/
---

## Supported microcontrollers

ESP32 microcontrollers must have at least 2 cores, 384kB SRAM, 2MB PSRAM and 8MB flash to work with Viam.
The following microcontrollers have been tested with Viam:

- [ESP32-WROVER Series](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/modules/esp32)

## About ESP32 microcontroller setup

Because microcontrollers do not run operating systems and are instead flashed with firmware, the setup process is different than for regular computers and SBCs.

> You can choose to use the pre-built binary for `viam-micro-server` which supports the following components:
> 
> - [`gpio`](/operate/reference/components/servo/gpio-micro-rdk/): A servo controlled by GPIO pins.
> - [`two_wheeled_base`](/operate/reference/components/base/two_wheeled_base/): A robotic base with differential steering.
> - [`free_heap_sensor`](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/examples/modular-drivers/src): Reports the amount of free heap memory on the microcontroller.
> - [`wifi_rssi_sensor`](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/examples/modular-drivers/src): Reports the signal strength of the ESP32's WiFi connection.
> 
> Or, you can build your own firmware with the Micro-RDK (the software development kit for microcontrollers from which `viam-micro-server` is built) and your choice of modules.

Author: Okay yeah I like the idea of switching this. Though "for testing purposes" is a bit vague since, what are they testing? Changed wording slightly:
```suggestion
To use an ESP32 controller with custom hardware, you build a firmware version from the Micro-RDK and modules to support your hardware.

To quickly try out Viam for microcontrollers, you can use the pre-built binary `viam-micro-server` which supports the following components:

- [`gpio`](/operate/reference/components/servo/gpio-micro-rdk/): A servo controlled by GPIO pins.
- [`two_wheeled_base`](/operate/reference/components/base/two_wheeled_base/): A robotic base with differential steering.
- [`free_heap_sensor`](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/examples/modular-drivers/src): Reports the amount of free heap memory on the microcontroller.
- [`wifi_rssi_sensor`](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/examples/modular-drivers/src): Reports the signal strength of the ESP32's WiFi connection.
```
@EshaMaharishi are there other use cases for viam-micro-server beyond essentially a quickstart? Do you think it is indeed the case that most need to do the other flow, in which case we should probably change "Advanced setup" to something like "Build your firmware" and move it up above the quickstart?

> Or, you can build your own firmware with the Micro-RDK (the software development kit for microcontrollers from which `viam-micro-server` is built) and your choice of modules.

Reviewer: This phrasing sounds good to me too.

viam-micro-server is indeed just a quickstart. I do think we could bring "build your firmware" onto this page, but I would probably have it after the quickstart, since it's quite a bit more involved.

I also think we could maybe get this PR in as-is, then have a separate PR for pulling "build your firmware" here? It will need some thought since both "build your firmware" and "write your own MicroRDK module" have a shared set of setup steps.

> Or, you can build your own firmware with the Micro-RDK (the software development kit for microcontrollers from which `viam-micro-server` is built) and your choice of modules.

Author: I for one wasn't suggesting moving all the involved content onto the page, I just meant swapping the order so that the current "advanced setup" section comes up higher on this page and still links out (since it is a lot).

> Or, you can build your own firmware with the Micro-RDK (the software development kit for microcontrollers from which `viam-micro-server` is built) and your choice of modules.

Author: discussed offline; committing suggestion

---
linkTitle: "Set up an ESP32"
title: "Set up an ESP32"
weight: 25
layout: "docs"
type: "docs"
images: ["/installation/thumbnails/install.png"]
imageAlt: "Install Viam"
no_list: false
description: "Install the lightweight version of the software that drives hardware and connects your device to the cloud."
aliases:
  - /installation/microcontrollers/
  - /installation/prepare/microcontrollers/
  - /installation/prepare/microcontrollers/
  - /build/micro-rdk/
  - /get-started/installation/microcontrollers/
  - /installation/viam-micro-server-setup/
---

## Supported microcontrollers

ESP32 microcontrollers must have at least 2 cores, 384kB SRAM, 2MB PSRAM and 8MB flash to work with Viam.
The following microcontrollers have been tested with Viam:

- [ESP32-WROVER Series](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/modules/esp32)

## About ESP32 microcontroller setup

> Because microcontrollers do not run operating systems and are instead flashed with firmware, the setup process is different than for other devices running Viam.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because microcontrollers do not run operating systems and are instead flashed with firmware, the setup process is different than for regular computers and SBC's.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Because microcontrollers do not run operating systems and are instead flashed with firmware, the setup process is different than for regular computers and SBCs.
```

- [`wifi_rssi_sensor`](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/examples/modular-drivers/src): Reports the signal strength of the ESP32's WiFi connection.

Or, you can build your own firmware with the Micro-RDK (the software development kit for microcontrollers from which `viam-micro-server` is built) and your choice of modules.

## Quickstart

To get started quickly with the pre-built `viam-micro-server` binary, follow these steps:

1. Create a [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) account.
   The Viam app is the online hub for configuring and managing devices as well as viewing data.

1. Add a new _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}}_ using the button in the top right corner of the **LOCATIONS** tab in the app.
   A machine represents your device.

1. From your machine's page in the Viam app, follow the setup instructions to install `viam-micro-server` on your device and connect it to the cloud.

   A secure connection is automatically established between your machine and the Viam app.
   When you update your machine's configuration, `viam-micro-server` automatically gets the updates.

> 1. Use the **+** button on your machine's **CONFIGURE** tab to add any of the supported components listed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is the same content as in "Configure supported hardware", and I think it's better for the user to follow the same left nav flow for both, since "Test your machine" also works the same way for both.

(Note that right now MicroRDK modules all have to be configured via raw json, but that will probably change soon, and I think it's fine for the docs to gloss over that for now.)

In a future iteration of "Connect Devices" (maybe even soon after this one), we could consider splitting up the MicroRDK "Build custom firmware" and "Write your own module" docs so that the "Build custom firmware" portion is on this page. But even then, after the user builds their firmware, they would resume the regular left nav flow for adding modules to their config and testing their machine.

Author: Hmm I guess I was thinking Micro users wouldn't necessarily go to Configure supported hardware since it's more rdk-centric now.

Wait RE raw JSON, so is https://docs.viam.com/operate/reference/components/servo/gpio-micro-rdk/ totally wrong?

Reviewer: I believe any pages that say to use the dropdown for a MicroRDK model are wrong - I had asked about this a couple months ago and can't remember if I got a clear answer in person (https://viaminc.slack.com/archives/C0644TMU36U/p1735937348630189). Asking again on Slack

Hmm, I guess I don't see Configure supported hardware as rdk-centric:

* "Configure hardware on your machine" will eventually apply to MicroRDK models, once they're in the app.viam dropdown and don't require being added via raw json. (Even now, conceptually it applies to MicroRDK models, we just haven't described the raw json method there)
* "Browse supported hardware" will apply to MicroRDK models, once they're in the Registry page on app (groundwork is being laid for this in the cloud builds project)
* "Virtual hardware components" conceptually applies, even if we don't have any virtual MicroRDK models atm
* "Add software services to your machine" applies, even if MicroRDK currently only supports the data capture service

Happy to chat about this over Zoom too - I'm pretty free this afternoon!

> 1. [Data capture and sync](/data-ai/capture-data/capture-sync/) is supported for microcontrollers.
>    You can click the **Add method** button on any component's config card to configure data capture for that component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Is this inaccurate? I was thinking that since it's the one service that is supported for the Micro-RDK maybe it should be talked about here since they might otherwise assume they can't do it.

Reviewer: It's not inaccurate, but related to my comment below about "Configure supported hardware" applying to MicroRDK too, I just think it makes more sense to have this page be just about setting up MicroRDK/viam-micro-server
